So if program synthesis is not compilation, it is not logic programming, and
it is not machine learning, then what is program synthesis? As mentioned
before, different people in the community have different working definitions
of what they would describe as program synthesis, but I believe the definition
below is one that both captures most of what today we understand as program
synthesis and also excludes some of the aforementioned classes of approaches.
Program Synthesis correspond to a class of techniques that are able to
generate a program from a collection of artifacts that establish semantic and
syntactic requirements for the generated code.
There are two elements of this definition that are important. The first is an
emphasis on the generation of a program; we expect the synthesizer to produce
code that solves our problem, as opposed to relying on extensive search at
runtime to find a solution for a particular input, as logic programming
systems do. The second is the emphasis on supporting specification of both
semantic and syntactic requirements. We expect synthesis algorithms to provide
us with some control over the space of programs that are going to be
considered, not just their intended behavior. It is important to emphasize
that individual synthesis systems may not themselves provide this flexibility;
in fact, the biggest successes of synthesis so far have been in specialized
domains where constraints on the space of programs have been "baked in" to the
synthesis system. Nevertheless, even if the flexibility is not exposed to the
users, the underlying synthesis algorithms do have significant flexibility in
how the space of programs is defined, and this is a big differentiator both
with respect to compilation and with respect to machine learning. In general,
both of these requirements imply that our synthesis procedures will rely on
some form of search, although the success of synthesis will be largely driven
by our ability to avoid having to exhaustively search the exponentially large
space of programs that arise for even relatively simple synthesis problems.
